We would have a conversation with
founders. You're saying like, gosh, I'm
I'm almost embarrassed to ask this
question, but who exactly is your target
customer? And three co-founders have
three different answers. After these
hundreds of teams that we've worked
with, we've seen that there's one
failure mode, which is they don't know
what that set of basics are. Then
there's this other failure mode where
they never test it.
Let's talk about the foundation sprint.
Walk us through the process. How does it
start? What are the steps?
The very beginning of your project, we
recommend this kind of crazy idea that
you clear your calendar. So the core
team come together for 10 hours roughly
and go through a sequence of activities
so that we can make all of the key
decisions together. I think a lot of
people wonder as they're hearing this is
why don't I just build something and
launch it and learn.
One phenomenon we've seen when teams are
building things really quickly with AI
is that the more AI generated or
assisted they are, the more generic they
tend to turn out. Put yourself in a
situation where you can slow down and do
some hard thinking, some deep thinking
about what's actually going to make your
product unique. going fast can actually
slow you down in the long run.
Today, my guests are Jake Knap and John
Zeratsky. The framework that Jake and
John share in this conversation is
basically the missing manual for
founders and product teams trying to
refine and test their startup or product
idea. It's called the foundation sprint
and it emerged out of the famous design
sprint which Jake and Jay-Z co-created
and also from working with over 300
teams building both new products at
startups and also with teams at larger
companies like Google, Microsoft,
YouTube, Slack, Uber and many more. They
published a book with this framework at
the beginning of this year called Click
and the excerpt from that book that
dives into this framework is one of my
most popular post of all time and is one
of the rare nonAI posts amongst the top
post rankings. In this conversation,
make sure to get your pencils out
because we go through exactly how to
execute this two-day sprint where at the
end of it, you have a very clear
hypothesis that your entire team is
aligned around that clarifies what
you're building, who you're building
for, how it differentiates from
competitors, and how to quickly test it
with real potential customers. The two
days that you invest in a sprint might
be the highest ROI days in the history
of your product. And I highly encourage
you to do this if you're in the process
of baking an idea. If you enjoy this
podcast, don't forget to subscribe and
follow it in your favorite podcasting
app or YouTube. Also, if you become an
annual subscriber of my newsletter, you
get a year free of a bunch of amazing
products, including Bolt, Linear,
Superhum, Notion, Perplexity, Granola,
and more. Check it out at
lenniesnewsletter.com and click bundle.
With that, I bring you Jake, Nap, and
John Zeratsky.
This episode is brought to you by Brex,
the financial stack used by one in every
three US venture-backed startups. Rex
knows that nearly 40% of startups fail
because they run out of cash. So, they
built a banking experience that focuses
on helping founders get more from every
dollar. It's a stark difference from
traditional banking options that leave a
startup's cash sitting idle while
chipping away at it with fees. To help
founders protect cash and extend runway,
Brex combined the best things about
checking, treasury, and FDIC insurance
in one powerhouse account. You can send
and receive money worldwide at lightning
speed. You can get 20x the standard FDIC
protection through program banks and you
can earn industry-leading yield from
your first dollar while still being able
to access your funds anytime. To learn
more, check out Bre at
Brex.com/banking-solutions.
That's brex.com/bankingsolutions.
Many of you are building AI products,
which is why I'm very excited to chat
with Brandon Fu, founder and CEO of
Paragon. Hey, Brandon.
Hey, Lenny. Thanks for having me.
So, integrations have become a big deal
for AI products. Why is that?
Integrations are mission critical for AI
for two reasons. First, AI products need
contacts from their customers business
data such as Google Drive files, Slack
messages, or CRM records. Second, for AI
products to automate work on behalf of
users, AI agents need to be able to take
action across these different third
party tools. So, where does Paragon fit
into all this? Well, these integrations
are a pain to build. And that's why
Paragon provides an embedded platform
that enables engineers to ship these
product integrations in just days
instead of months across every use case
from rag data ingestion to agentic
actions. And I know from firsthand
experience that maintenance is even
harder than just building it for the
first time.
Exactly. We believe product teams should
focus engineering efforts on competitive
advantages, not integrations. That's why
companies like you.com, AI21, and
hundreds of others use Paragon to
accelerate their integration strategy.
If you want to avoid wasting months of
engineering on integrations that your
customers need, check out Paragon at
useparagon.com/lenny.
Jake and Jay-Z, thank you so much for
being here and welcome to the podcast.
Hey Lenny, thanks for having us.
Yeah, thanks so much for having us on
again. This is always a treat. This is
going to be a very tactical
conversation. We're going to be going
through how to actually execute a
foundation sprint. And the reason that
I'm excited to do this is you guys
shared an excerpt from your book where
you initially shared this whole concept.
It's called click. Uh you shared this in
my newsletter. And I was just looking at
it and that excerpt that post is amongst
the top 10 most popular post of all time
in my newsletter. Uh which is especially
special because it's not an AI oriented
book. It's one of the few non AI posts
that are near the top 10. Uh which just
tells me how valuable this is to people
and consistently has sat there. It
hasn't been usurped. It just continues
to climb. So I'm really excited to just
have a conversation where we share
actually how to do this. Let me just
start with the beginning just a little
backstory on how the foundation sprint
came to be. I know it emerged out of the
now very famous uh design sprint which
you guys also developed. So just give us
a very brief overview of just how this
came to be. this idea of this foundation
sprint. Well, maybe I'll start by
talking about the design sprint part
because it is essential to understanding
the foundation sprint and the design
sprint first developed I I had been
working at the beginning of my career at
Microsoft for a few years. Went to
Google. This is like 2007, 2008, 2009
and was working on the Gmail team. Was
working on some, you know, projects that
were just executing well, delivering
shipping.
But I had this other project, this side
project that had been going on for three
years with a couple of colleagues, was
going nowhere, and it looked like their
office was going to get shut down after
the financial crisis. They were in
Stockholm. I went there for a week. We
cleared our calendars for the week and
we created a prototype of this this
thing because we decided look we're
we're never going to get anywhere. We've
tried making the perfect pitch. We've
tried to, you know, make the ideal PRD.
We've tried to show the the ideal design
and we just we can't perfection is not
working. We're not able to align people.
We're not able to to get sort of
executive support for this thing. We
couldn't convince Larry and Sergey and
Eric that they should fund this thing.
And in that week in Stockholm, we
created a prototype instead. We decided,
you know what, forget it. We're just
going to build something and put it in
people's hands, put it in our fellow
Googler's hands. And that prototype was
what became Google Meet. It was this
video conferencing tool that you could
use in the in the web browser.
No big deal.
Yeah, it was it was really cool. I mean,
the the the outcome of that that's
definitely probably the most productive
week I've ever I've ever had. But the uh
the thing that struck me at the time and
in in hindsight was wow, it was so
different to clear the calendar for a
week and have the entire focal point of
every person on the team be how do we
create a prototype that's so real that
that works so well that people will
think it's real that they'll react like
it's real that they'll want it. And we
were in survival mode, you know, we were
trying to keep that office from getting
shut down. But the the notion that maybe
you could repeat that and recreate that
is what led me to create the design
sprint. So for a couple of years at
Google, I start running these oneweek
programs with teams trying to go at the
beginning of a project from you know
zero to a prototype at the end that we
can that we could sort of evaluate test
and then I went to go work at Google
ventures. So separate one of the
alphabet companies were investing in
startups. I meet John Zeratsky and we
start running these design sprints with
well it turned out to be over the course
of five years uh I don't know couple
hundred teams
working in the early days with founders
the early days of their you establishing
the product for the first time trying to
build it from zero to to one or a new
marketing campaign a new ad campaign
some big high-risk endeavor we'd get to
work alongside them for a week and we
ended up refining this process into a
recipe so across five days it's map,
sketch, decide, prototype, and test. One
big focal point for each day. So, at the
end of the week, you've got a tested
prototype, and you learn like, are we on
the right track or or not? And that's
the that's the design sprint. That's
kind of the the, you know, the prologue,
the backstory to this thing. And then
after a few years at Google Ventures,
John and I left and eventually together
with our co-founder Eli Goldman, we
started our own venture firm, Character
Capital. And that's kind of where the
story of the foundation sprint comes in.
Okay. Awesome. Uh Jay-Z, anything you
wanted to add?
One of our goals, probably our biggest
goal for starting our own VC firm was
that we wanted to be able to focus on
just the kinds of companies and the
stage of company building that was the
most fun to us, but also was where we
thought we could have the biggest
impact. And so, you know, for us with
our background as as designers, that is
the early days, the first couple of
months or the first year or two years of
building a a new business. And at GV,
you know, sometimes we did that, but
sometimes we were working with with
companies that were already well
established. And when we'd come into
those companies, they kind of knew what
they were doing. They knew what they
stood for. They knew how they were
different in the market and how they
were positioned. And so we could help
them, you know, answer these big
questions and solve these problems and
test their prototypes with customers.
But when we started investing in, you
know, truly preede, sometimes inception
stage, you know, pre-product,
pre-revenue, pre- everything companies,
there was this piece missing at the
beginning of that process. So we we'd
run design sprints and they would be
helpful, but oftentimes it felt like
there was there was a a foundational
element of that project that we didn't
quite have our hands around. And it was
things like, you know, what is the
problem you're solving and who's the
who's the ideal customer? How are you
different than what's in the market
today? Who are your actual competitors?
And there were these questions that just
kept coming up again and again that led
us to say, hey, we need to create a new
sprint method, something that is really
targeted for the very beginning of these
big new projects. And and so that was
what led us to create the foundation
sprint um at Character Capital in 2021,
2022.
Okay. Yeah. I was wondering the timeline
on this. What I love about stuff like
this, like episodes like this, is you
guys have done so much work and done
this so many times with so many
companies, so many founders, and have
learned what works and doesn't work. You
said hundreds of founders, hundreds of
startups, and you've just spent so many
hours studying this, refining it,
crafting it, and now you're just here to
share all the answers. Save us so much
time. Just like the ROI on this is
incredible for us. So, I appreciate you
guys doing this. Let's get into it.
Let's talk about the foundation sprint.
Uh, walk us through the process. How
does it start? What are the steps?
So, specifically what we talk about with
the foundation sprint is it's the very
beginning of your project. We recommend
this kind of crazy idea that you clear
your sk.
So, the core team, this is the
co-founders. If it's a startup, if it's
a product team inside a large
organization, it's the, you know, it's
whoever's in charge of product, it's
whoever's in charge of engineering, it's
whoever's in charge of design, it's
whoever's in charge of marketing. is the
core leadership team. They're going to
come together for it's going to be 10
hours roughly give or take. And during
those 10 hours, we're going to go
through a sequence of activities, very
highly scripted sequence of activities
so that we can make all of the key
decisions together and identify the
basics of the project, what what's going
to differentiate us in the marketplace
and what's the best approach or
implementation path. All of those
together form a hypothesis and then we
recommend so you finish. Now, that's
your foundation sprint. You've got your
founding hypothesis. Once you've got
that founding hypothesis, then you're
going to go and do design sprints. And
we recommend you clear the calendar for
two to three weeks at least, so you have
the chance to be wrong about your
hypothesis. And we're going to run
experiments. And again, the design
sprint, highly scripted, calendar, you
know, emails off. We're just Slack is
off. We're just focused on running
through these sequence of decisions,
building prototypes, getting them in
front of customers, learning about a
scorecard that relates back to the
founding hypothesis. So, at the big
picture, it's it's going to be anywhere
from 10 hours to, you know, three to
four weeks. You're going to run this
detailed script of activities with your
team with their calendars clear. And
that's crazy. And most people won't do
it. But if you do it, it confers upon
you a huge advantage because now you're
you're you've got information. You you
know whether or not your product clicks
with customers. And that's a we've seen
that be just such a tremendous signal
for is there going to be product market
fit.
Okay, that was really helpful. The 10
hours is that specifically that's the
foundation sprint time box.
That's the foundation sprint time box.
Yeah. And it's it's give or take, right?
It might you might go fast and be done
in in eight. You might have a lot of
conversations and have a slightly larger
team and might take you 12. So we like
to spread it out over two days. Do two,
you know, like four to six hour blocks.
Okay. And then the three to four
weeksish, that's including the design
sprint.
That's the design sprint. Yeah. One week
per sprint.
Okay. This is incredible ROI on 10 hours
of work. Uh basically over two days you
get to have a much stronger sense of
whether your idea is any good and you
can Yeah. That is that a simple way to
describe it like you just supercharge uh
validating an idea.
Exactly. Yeah. It's it's a it's a chance
to in the in the 10 hours it's a chance
to get clarity about the core of your
strategy which is something that teams
will often go months without really
nailing down. and the the three to four
weeks that's a chance to run experiments
and get confidence you're you're
actually building the right thing.
Okay, let's uh talk about these two
days. How does how do you lay it out?
How do you approach it? What should
someone do if they want to actually try
this at home?
So there are three phases to the
foundation sprint. First phase is the
basics. Second phase is differentiation
and the third phase is the approach to
the project. So again, all three of
those are going to come together to
create the founding hypothesis. So the
first phase, the basics as I mentioned,
that's identifying who's your customer,
what problem are you solving for the
customer, what's the competition for
solving that problem, how do they solve
it today, and what are the alternatives,
how how else do people solve this, what
are the workarounds?
Those are really almost embarrassingly
simple things to answer. But when we do
this with a team and everybody's
answering, you know, proposing their
answer to each question, we see
everybody's got a different perspective.
And then when we lock in the decision
maker on the team says, "Okay, it's
going to be this one. It's going to be
this one. It's going to be this one."
Now, we have clarity and and confidence
that that's the right way to go. So,
we'll move forward from the basics into
differentiation and identify what are
the things that can set us apart from
those competitors. And we're going to
use the advantages we have. We're going
to use our our insight. We're going to
use our motivation. and we're going to
use our special capabilities.
These are things again people are aware
of these things. They're in tune to it,
but we want to get super super specific.
And we'll go into an example in a second
and I think that'll make it more clear
exactly what we mean. But going then
from differentiation to saying what are
all of the different implementation
paths we could take here. Let's identify
what those are, put a little detail
behind them, and then we have a
structured path for people to take so
they can weigh that decision but move
through really quickly. commit to one,
have a backup plan in case you end up
feeling like you need to pivot once you
start sprinting on it. And all of that
together is going to form this this kind
of Mad Libs sentence. If we solve this
problem for this customer uh with this
approach, we think they're going to
choose it over the competitors because
of differentiator one and differentiator
2. And it's it's almost silly how simple
this thing is, but really powerful if
for founders to have that that clarity
about, okay, here it all is in one
sentence. Now, let's go let's go test
and make sure this is true.
Amazing. Let's look at an example.
That's a really good idea. I know you
brought some some examples. You're going
to do some screen sharing. Uh you're
going to pull it up. If you're watching
on YouTube, you'll be able to see it.
Also, if you're watching on Spotify, you
can see the video. uh if you're an
Apple, sorry, but uh do your best to
describe what we're gonna be looking at.
Yeah. So, we're gonna talk about this
company called Latchet first. This is
the first company we'll talk about.
Latchet is a startup who was in our last
group of character labs and we can go
into to character labs later on but
essentially this is a kind of an
accelerator-l like program that we run
at Character Capital where we invest in
a a group of companies at the same time
and we run them through that process
that we were just describing where we
start with a foundation sprint and then
it's going to be a sequence of three
design sprints after that so that
they're they're testing and refining
that hypothesis And so it's a great time
for them. These are founders who have
just started their companies. They're
kind of, you know, that preede very
beginning zero stage. And the the
progress you can see in those three and
a half, four weeks, it's phenomenal. So
uh let's let's talk about Latchet. So
Latchet, a couple co-founders, Chris and
James, who were they had left Substack,
they were engineers leading up the
growth team at Substack, and they wanted
to build a product for for artisans. So
if you imagine like you're a you're a
jewelry maker, you're a you know uh
you're a painter, you're a woodworker,
and you want to sell your products
outside of your immediate you know,
community, the physical place where you
are, your physical location. Well, you
can, you know, you can build a site on
Shopify, but you still have to market it
if you do that. You got to figure out
how to reach those folks. You can put
your products on Etsy, but Etsy has
become quite commoditized. So, you're
going to be up against everybody
everywhere, and it's going to be very
hard for you to build an identity there,
like to build a sense of who I am, what
I'm all about.
And so what Chris and James thought was,
you know, maybe we could use some of the
the techniques and methods we we used at
Substack to help people find other, you
know, other newsletter writers through
their community, through recommendations
they make and and help help out artisans
in that way. Wouldn't that be cool? So
they were kind of at that stage. They
had a few different ideas about what
form that might take, what that might
look like when they joined Character
Labs. And so that's kind of the the
backdrop to to this little quick story
I'll tell.
And there's one really important thing
to emphasize about Chris and James that
Jake mentioned briefly, but I think is
is worth repeating, which is that
they're engineers. They are builders.
Their instinct is to write code. It's to
build software. And uh they actually
told us that they were excited but
nervous to come into character labs
where we would be encouraging them not
to write code right away to take this
time to clarify
the differentiation the the structure of
what they're building and to validate
that with customers before they went all
in on building a particular approach.
And I think you'll see in this example
how while they were a little hesitant to
do that upfront, eventually they saw how
much uh more valuable it was to work in
this way versus just diving right into
building something.
Uh that's actually really helpful
context and I speaking of the Substack
re recommendations feature was one of
the most game-changing features for me
with my newsletter. So uh because it
basically supercharged my growth. So, I
get why they'd be so excited about
bringing this learning to other to other
ideas and to their own startup. So,
thank you guys for doing that. And yeah,
I'm even more excited to see what
they're building. Well, let's take a
look. So, the this board here that we're
looking at, this is like their muro
board. So, we've got like a big template
and whether you're watching on YouTube
or listening to this episode, we'll
we'll talk about at the end how you can
get access to this template which will
kind of guide you through the process.
But what happens in this first step in
the foundation sprint in the basics as
you said before is that we're going
through a sequence of questions. Who's
the most important customer for example
is the first question the very first
question that a team needs to answer.
And as we do that just as an important
side note we're using this tactic that
we call work alone together. And
specifically the note and vote is this
method where everyone's in silence. You
know, in this case, both Chris and
James, but if you have a team of seven,
it's all seven people be working in
silence, writing down their own answers
to this question. Who's the most
important customer or who are all the
different kind of customers we might
consider? Writing down multiple answers
and then once we've got those answers,
the team's going to vote on those. and
then one person who's designated as the
decider. Usually it's going to be the
CEO of the startup, but it could be some
cases maybe it's the the you know chief
product officer whatever however they
decide to do it. But one person's going
to say okay this is our decision for now
and now we're going to move on. And by
doing this and using silence and using
structure and then having a designated
decision-making process, we can move
through a lot of conversations very
quickly and save some of that energy
that it requires to make decisions for
the decisions that matter most. In this
case, what we're really worried about on
day one of our foundation sprint is
differentiation. So, we don't want to
spend too long on the basics. Anyway, we
motor through customer problem, the
capability, the insight, the motivation
that the team has. Those are all
advantages. And who are the competition?
And we get this this sort of one-page
sheet, the basics, and it's going to
have the answers to all those questions.
Who's our customer? In this case,
artisans who want to sell online, but
they sort of find tech and marketing to
be hard. The problem is sales growth.
You know, if we if we jump down to the
competition, their number one competitor
is Shopify, but Etsy is another way
people approach this as we mentioned.
But there's also, you know, in-person
sales and art fairs or other ways that
people try to get at this problem. And
realistically, if you're delivering a
solution, you need to stand out from all
of those. And then there's their
advantages. We talked about, you know,
this this key one, they built Substacks
network growth features. So, they know
how to do this thing. So, now that we've
established the basics, we're going to
move on to differentiation. Before you
do that, actually, let me ask a question
here because I think people seeing this
could think, oh, this is like I know all
this stuff. so obvious like like it's
like okay I get I have an idea I don't
need to do this where do you find people
most are often surprised by something
that emerges out of this is like one of
these buckets often wow we this is often
not what you expected or is it generally
a lot of surprises what do you what do
you experience there
I think the moment where you immediately
start to see value is when everyone on
the team is writing down their answers
to these questions and then people put
their heads up and look at what everyone
else has written and they realize, oh,
that's not what I would have that's not
what I said or I didn't think of that
one or you know, gosh, the actual
concrete reality of going through with
the team and and being very transparent
and clear about how we're making
decisions too about each of these
things. When that basic sheet comes
together and you see the specifics, the
specifics are surprising, but it's also
familiar. we look at it and you say,
"Yeah, that looks that all looks right,
but I'm surprised by the specifics.
They're not what I would have written if
I had written it down. I might have
gotten two of those things, two of the,
you know, six items on there." And I
think that's what's that's what's most
surprising. It's and I think it's also
kind of a sense of relief that like,
okay, well, that's very reassuring that
we have we have clarity about that and
we've made it concrete. These activities
that we do during the basics are
impactful for different reasons. I think
that problem can be really interesting
because when teams sit down and think
about it, it is often less clear than
they thought that what the actual
problem is. Like wait, what problem do
our customers really have that we're
solving for them? I think competition
can be sort of an aha moment when uh
they start to think beyond just oh what
are the other startups in this space
like if this is an important problem
your customers probably already solving
it somehow it may be a workaround it may
be an alternative it may not be a direct
competitor but if it's worth solving
they probably have some way of dealing
with it today and what is that and when
you zoom out and you look at that set of
competitors it can be a little scary but
it it is also uh an important moment for
teams and then I think that advantage um
isn't necessarily immediately beneficial
but it becomes really valuable when the
teams are looking at differentiation
because you know startups can't compete
with big companies on scale or on you
know having built-in distribution
advantages or having partnerships in
place. So they really have to dig deep
and figure out what can we do that
nobody else is capable of doing. And so
by taking time to sit down and do this
almost unnatural act of like wait why
are we special and and you know certain
when we're able to encourage teams to
really think about that um it sets them
up really nicely for the next step which
is differentiation ideally based on
those advantages. What I'm hearing is a
lot of the value here is also just uh
this everyone has what the answers in
their head in some way but just seeing
what everyone else is thinking and then
aligning on one is is a lot of this
value. Yeah, it's like thinking deeply
and quietly about it yourself and then
seeing what everybody else comes up with
when they are able to also think deeply
and quietly about it. Um, and then you
know ideally if they're working you know
with us in character labs having
somebody who's a bit external to push
them and say like try harder like dig
deeper like what really makes you
special here? How are you really going
to beat open AI? How are you really
going to beat Google at this? This whole
idea of noting and voting and working in
silence such a recurring theme on this
podcast of not doing brainstorms in
large groups with a lot of people like
it feels like that's just dead in every
way. I just had this naming expert on
the podcast who names names some of the
biggest companies in the world. Pentium
Powerbook Sonos forcell and that's their
approach is they they used to do
brainstorms. He's like that doesn't
work. And now they just have small teams
sitting quietly in a room working
together on
on ideas and then thinking on their own.
So that's such an interesting trend.
Yeah. And I feel like IDO just like
created this whole we need to brainstorm
post-its and then everyone's like that's
not actually working. Let's stop doing
that. Um and the other thing that I feel
as you're talking through this like what
I'm feeling this is there's for founders
there's not like a manual for starting a
company. You always have it feels like
this dark art of like I guess I got to
find product market fit and this idea
feels like this is almost a manual of
the everything you need to do to just
get the basics of is this even worth
doing?
Yeah. And and that's why we created it
because we were we still are investing
in founders who are you know they're
they're incredibly talented and they're
smart and they have a background that is
going to give them an advantage in
building some particular product. But
you're right there's there's no manual
and we were just kind of solving our own
problem and you know we we believe in
this so much and we see the ROI as being
so great that this is the first thing we
do when we make an investment. you know,
we invest in a company and then we run a
foundation sprint with them right away.
We run more foundation sprints with
startups than we do design sprints at
this point. Um, and you know, I don't
think we can ever encapsulate every
single thing that you need to know or
that you need to do to start a company,
but this is our this is our best take at
like what you should do in the early
days to set yourself up for success and
maximize the chances that you're going
to reach product market fit.
Amazing. Okay, let's keep going. So,
we've done the basics. What comes next?
Yeah. So, we've done the basics and
another important thing that we've
accomplished while going through the
sequence of activities and the basics is
to boot up the right context into
everyone's head so that we're ready for
the main event of this first day, which
is differentiation. And I still have
very firmly in my mind, like I grew up
with a Mac plus computer and you'd put
in, you know, the disc and the drive and
you'd have to you'd have to boot up the
the app that you wanted to run. That
that's kind of the way our brains work.
Like we have limited working memory and
we've got to have the right stuff in
there when we're when we're going to
make a big decision. We're going to
think hard about a certain problem or
question. It's important to have the
right context fresh at hand. So the
basics is really the context for
thinking about differentiation and
differentiation is the heart of what
we're doing in the foundation sprint
because
it's it goes without saying perhaps but
we like to say it when you are making a
new product people want to ignore it.
People want to not pay attention to it.
And if they do have to pay attention to
it, if it gets in their face, they they
want to not try it because we just are
all bombarded by so many things and
that's never been more true than it is
now. And so we have defenses up to save
to save calories in our brain. We just
we don't want to engage. It's crucial
then that a product has a clear promise
that it makes and that that promise is
is radically differentiated from the
alternatives and that that promise is
strong enough that you'll try it and
then that the product delivers on that
promise. And so when we talk about
differentiation, we're saying look, we
want you to be really clear on your
promise. not the promise you're making
to investors about this technology and
what's special about the technology or
what's special about the market
opportunity, but with the customer at
the center. We've started the basics by
talking about the customer and the
problem they have and the way they see
the world. And we want to talk about
what you're going to offer to the
customer and how it's going to separate
from the alternatives. And so, in the
end of this next phase of the foundation
sprint, we're going to have a a 2 by two
diagram that's going to look like a
business school 101 diagram. And in
fact, we often refer back to this Steve
Jobs uh iPhone introduction slide where
he talks about the the iPhone and he
makes a joke about it. This is a
business school 101 diagram, but it's
really helpful to start developing your
product with this clarity about this is
the promise we'll make to customers at
the end and we're going to deliver on
that promise because we can test and
prove that in design sprints. So anyway,
we start off, we talk about
differentiators and we talk about
classic differentiators, fast to slow,
smart to not so smart to borrow from the
iPhone slide, easy to use to hard to
use, and so on. And we just start off
and have the team, okay, let's just
let's just score those up against the
competition. Put a sticky note on those
continuums showing where you think the
product could be. And usually you'll do
this and maybe you'll start to see,
well, there are a couple places where we
can stand out on these classics. That's
great. These classics are easily
understandable by any, you know, any
customer. We're all sort of familiar
with these kinds of things. So, okay,
that's great. Then we get into writing
custom differentiators. So, we're going
to write a bunch of, you know, good
things on one end, crummy opposite on
the other end, and then we're going to
score those. And so, for the latchet
story, we'll pick up with with Chris and
James here. You know, they've written,
well, we we could be uh really we could
really differentiate onworked versus
siloed. our approach isworked. If you're
using Shopify, you're you're siloed,
right? Or or we, you know, maybe maybe
we can differentiate on painless
business growth versus labor intensive
business growth. So that might be the
specific way we describe the promise of
our product. So after evaluating a bunch
of these, writing a bunch of these,
voting on them quietly, you know, and
then the decider is going to say, "All
right, I want to choose a couple of
these and we're going to try them out."
The teams are going to, if you're
running a foundation sprint, you're
going to try out a few differentiators.
You're gonna score against your
competitors. You're going to create a
scale. And you're gonna say, "Okay,
let's be honest. Let's be tough. Where
do we really think we could stack up
against the competitors on this
differentiator we've chosen?" In great
detail, plotting each each company or
product one at a time. Okay. So, you
know, you do that for one
differentiator, you do it for another.
You do it until you feel like we've got
two that are really strong. And then you
make that business school 101 diagram.
And so, you know, here's here's this one
for says Lyric. They changed their name
to Latchet. So I'm going to I'll edit
that real time.
I love this rebrand.
So yeah. So Latchets, you know, up here
in the top right corner and we say,
"Okay, look, this is a good
differentiation chart because you've got
this quadrant here, this quadrant here,
this quadrant here, right? You've got
the So you're in the top right and you
got to be in the top right. You always
got to be in the top right. Always have
to be top.
You always have to be in the top right.
And if you see those other three
quadrants, the the top left, the bottom
left, the bottom right, those form an
L-shape. And we call that loserville. So
we want to we want to have like a way of
looking at the world that puts all of
the competitors into Loserville. And
then we want to say like, okay, if you
can deliver on that and if that promise
is compelling to customers, so both
those things have to be true. Can you
deliver on it? And do customers care and
believe that that that matters to them?
If both of those things are true, you
have a really compelling promise. You
have the possibility of a very
successful product. So now we've
identified that and that's that becomes
a core of our hypothesis. Can we is that
differentiation true? So
that's the differentiation step. Uh
before you move on to the next step, is
that where you're going next? Just so I
could take a Yeah. Yeah.
Okay. Follow a couple threads. This is
so awesome. There's so many there's just
so much value here. Um, also just this
slide at the end here, if folks are
watching YouTube, this is like your deck
slide, right? Where you show Yeah. your
your competitors and how you're you're
better than them all.
Yeah. And actually, I want to jump on
that for a second because
we've all seen 2 by 2 diagram, right?
There's a ton of these. They're they're
all over the place. And if you're
anything like me, I just ignored these.
I just thought these were pretty much BS
up until like well whenever we started
running these foundations sprints three
or four years ago and I think the reason
why usually these these 2 by two
diagrams feel like this is just
consultant baloney this is just like who
you already know it's it's because you
know maybe one person makes this chart
and they do it quickly because they need
a slide for a slide deck and the
audience they're considering maybe it's
investors and so you know often these
describe technology or they describe the
market opportunity. They don't talk
about the customer's perspective. And
the other thing is that they're they're
not proven. There's no evidence behind
the fact that these are these true. So
if they are if they did happen to be
about customer perspective, it's
unlikely that the whole team would have
weighed in on on what those
differentiators are. And it's very
unlikely that we would have tested and
proven that that that matters and that
we can deliver on it. And so if you do
all of those things and you do it at the
beginning of the project, we think this
has the potential. We've seen it. It's
it becomes this well this guiding light.
Here's the north star. We need to
deliver on this. This is what we have to
create. And that helps you make
decisions all the way through your
product development cycle. Just to point
people to uh justification for why
differentiation is so important, there's
a couple episodes that I did that uh
I'll point to in the show notes. um that
just give you more context of why you
need to differentiate. So I spoke of uh
David Plac who is this naming expert
that we just had on the podcast. He his
whole thing is when he's coming up with
a name for like Sonos or Verscell or
Windsor if it's different it has to
differentiate and he talks about this in
depth. So we'll point to that episode if
you're and this is just like if you're
not convinced why are we spending so
much time on differentiation. Uh, also
April Dunford who's like the I don't
know the the the god of of of
positioning. She has differentiation is
such a core part of her approach to
positioning. And so there's just like so
much evidence to tell you that you
differentiation is a really important
step and element of successful
companies.
Yeah. One of the things that I've
noticed about these topics, the these
the basics we talked about already,
differentiation, this notion of you need
a foundation for your project, it's a
bit more under the radar for people. I
think it's a bit harder for people to
immediately see like, oh, we need this.
We see the people who react the
strongest to this and have the strongest
like immediate affinity to this idea
actually being you know startup founders
people who are really sophisticated like
in this challenge product managers who
are at you know we're uh uh invited in
to speak at openai and anthropic about
this and we see the product people there
being like oh my god this is this is
really powerful this is the kind of
stuff we need. I think for a lot of
folks though it can sound like ah this
is just elementary you know
differentiation of course we need to
differentiate. The problem is that all
this stuff gets backgrounded. It's it's
something we we've thought about a bit.
We assume we're on the same page. We
assume we're going to deliver something.
But then kind of business as usual
happens. We build a product. We get kind
of more interested in the technology and
delivering that and we end up trying to
sell it to customers at the end. We end
up putting a coat of paint on it with a
marketing page or sales deck. we haven't
actually built from the beginning the
thing that we know is going to matter to
people.
One of the most useful steps here that
uh I haven't seen before is just a
starting place for how to even start
thinking about differentiation. Like
everyone's always probably thinking
price and speed. Maybe you guys have a
really cool just starting list that you
showed here. Anything more you can add
here for helping people start to think
about ways to differentiate beyond the
obvious price and speed and I don't know
couple more. So, I'm just going to jump
into another startup here just so we can
see what this sheet looks like with
scores on it. So, this is a startup
called Melo. Anyway, the standard
classic differentiators where we start,
they are fast to slow, smart to not so
smart, easy to use to hard to use, free
to expensive, focused to
one-sizefits-all,
simple to complicated, and integrated to
siloed. And so, you know, there you
could probably argue there's these
others that should be included or some
of those should be taken off. But what
we like about this is that it's a small
set. They're easy to understand. We know
customers can understand these and they
create a great starting place for your
team to think about differentiation
because you can quickly look at this
list and start scoring where you think
your product could be on these scales.
And you know that if you can use one of
these, people will understand it. But it
also starts to make the team comfortable
with this notion of differentiation. And
again, we want to make differentiation
something that all of the co-founders or
all of the core team can participate in.
It's not just the job of the person
writing the pitch deck. It's not just
the job of the marketer or the
salesperson, but we're getting
everybody's
perspective in on it. And this is a
great warm-up activity before we start
to write our own custom differentiators.
Awesome. And then again, this is just
inspiration for coming up with more ways
to differentiate. Something that is a
common uh question I think for founders
is price as a differentiator. Is there
any insight you guys have there? Like
how often do you land on price being a
good differentiator with the startups
you work with? I think price is rarely
the the most important differentiator.
Part of what's interesting about going
through these classic differentiators,
these standard ones first, and then
jumping into the custom ones, is that
the classic ones are sort of universal,
but it is going to be hard to beat the
competition on very many of these. Like,
it's going to be hard to build a product
that's faster than what Google can build
or what OpenAI can build. It's going to
be harder to be cheaper than those
competitors because they just have so
many more resources. they can have lost
leader products that are that are
underpriced. Where I think pricing has
become a really clear advantage for some
companies is those that are leveraging
AI to solve problems that were
previously unsolvable with software. So
you know we have a company that we
invested in called bindwell and uh they
use AI to design precision pesticides
and uh we ran a foundation sprint with
them right after investing and you know
five years ago you couldn't design
pesticides with AI right it wasn't it
wasn't possible right if if you even if
you had that idea you wouldn't have been
able to build it and now you can and so
for them one of the big advantages is
like yeah these pesticides they can be
they can be a lot cheaper because it
doesn't require this like massive team
of you know R&D chemists to tinker and
experiment with things in the lab to try
to create new pesticides. We can design
them with AI. So it is it is more often
true in AI companies like that but it's
very difficult to to compete on price in
general and we think we find that it is
not as it's not as durable of an
advantage as some of these other things.
That is such a good point. Uh because
historically price has been a don't
don't compete on price for exactly what
you said. It's not it's hard to do long
term. It's kind of a race to the bottom
especially if there's incumbents. They
can price a lot lower. But with AI that
is a really often and strong
differentiator like now do this thing
like like cursor you basically is
competing on uh you know you're saving
engineering time and it's worth so much
money to you.
Yeah. At the same time, like the output
of the AI is probably not going to be
quite as good as a human process. So, it
can be a little bit cheaper. Yeah. For
now. But it has to be a lot cheaper. It
has to be, you know, I've heard people
offer 10x cheaper than the legacy sort
of um manual approach to solving that
problem as as a rule of thumb.
That's awesome. Okay. Uh I'll just
quickly reference there's an episode
that will come out before this with
Modavon about pricing strategy and
there's a lot of discussion actually on
this. Oh, great. especially with how to
design your price uh with customers as
you're starting a company. Also uh the
episode with uh the founder of
superhuman Rahul he actually spent
there's a lot of cool context on how he
differentiated superhuman and it was
actually very much on speed and is speed
actually yeah speed was where he landed
and to your point it was both it was the
vend diagram of what you said can we do
this and do people value it and that's
where his research pointed to is people
really value this and they were able to
achieve it. One of the things that's
really interesting about this example
here that we're looking at, Melo, is
that you can see that they were not the
best on all these scales. You know, it's
and if teams are going through and
they're being really realistic about how
they stack up against the competition,
it's normal and natural to find that
you're not going to be the best on all
these differentiators. And that is
really helpful for creating clarity in
your positioning and in your marketing
because you're not going to show a
featured checklist chart that you know
says you're better at everything than
every competitor. But if you can drive
home one or two things that your
customers really care about and that you
can be radically better at, um it's
going to improve your chances of of
winning and finding product market fit.
And and we find that going through this
process where you're not just thinking
about one differentiator at a time or
you're not trying to win on all of them,
but you're looking across this scale of
options and you're being just really
honest about where you stack up can both
point you in the right direction in
terms of what you will win on, but also
can give you the comfort to say, "Hey,
it's okay if we're not better than every
single company on every single one of
these things."
That's great context. That's going to
make people feel a lot better. I think
today's episode is brought to you by
KOD. I personally use Koda every single
day to manage my podcast and also to
manage my community. It's where I put
the questions that I plan to ask every
guest that's coming on the podcast. It's
where I put my community resources. It's
how I manage my workflows. Here's how
KOD can help you. Imagine starting a
project at work and your vision is
clear. You know exactly who's doing what
and where to find the data that you need
to do your part. In fact, you don't have
to waste time searching for anything
because everything your team needs from
project trackers and OKRs to documents
and spreadsheets lives in one tab all in
KOD. With Kod's collaborative all-in-one
workspace, you get the flexibility of
docs, the structure of spreadsheets, the
power of applications, and the
intelligence of AI, all in one easy to
organize tab. Like I mentioned earlier,
I use Kota every single day. And more
than 50,000 teams trust KOD to keep them
more aligned and focused. If you're a
startup team looking to increase
alignment and agility, Kota can help you
move from planning to execution in
record time. To try it for yourself, go
to kod.io/lenny
today and get 6 months free of the team
plan for startups. That's cooda.io/lenny
to get started for free and get six
months of the team plan. k cod.io/lenny.
io/lenny.
Anything else on differentiation before
we move on to the third step of
designing your approach?
I think it's worth taking a look at what
it looks like when you have a bunch of
sort of these customcraftrafted
differentiators. What that might look
like because in the case of Melo, we've
got I don't know there must be 25 here.
And you know, so they've written
purposeful, magical, clear, personal,
provides direction, flexible, human,
creative, beautiful, all kind and on and
on. What they're trying to get at and
what we want every team to sort of think
about here is what is a new version of
reality, a new lens that you can offer
to your customers on the world. Because
a lot of times you're building a new
product, you actually have to change the
way people think about what's possible
and what matters to them. Those classics
are often already well trotten ground
where other people have differentiated.
They've already thought about it. But
these these new particular things that
you know are are possible with your
technology that you know is possible
with the customer problem, the things
that you believe might matter. It's
really interesting to try some very
fine-tuned list of slight sometimes just
a slight variation. We we slightly
change this wording or the way we
describe what's great about what we do.
And that is the thing we think is really
going to stand out. And again, you can
see even on this list that they've
custom written, when we see where they
score it, they're not all the way to the
good end of the scale on all of them.
You know, when they get honest and look
through, they're like, well, actually,
you know, maybe we can't deliver on
this. But this one, we really can. And
this one we also suspect will matter to
customers.
Where did Melo land on the
differentiators they picked and where
did Latchet land?
Yeah, let's take a look. for Melo. They
tried out a bunch before they decided
here. So, they actually scored with the
competitors on these scales. And just
for context, Melo is a tool that allows
you to run very simple, very targeted,
very useful AI agents for common
everyday tasks like summarizing your
email or um uh cleaning up your calendar
or drafting responses to messages. And
one of their insights was that there's
been so many AI products that have
overpromised about being able to replace
all humans and do anything and you know
um 10x your productivity but so few of
them have actually delivered on those
promises. And so they have this insight
that if they can be really focused and
really human and really high quality and
they can deliver on that promise of, you
know, making your life better by
offloading
tedious tasks that that's going to
really click with with customers.
That's a great context. Thank you for
having that. So Melo lands on mobile
first and works out of the box with
their two differentiators and they're
trying to differentiate from know Gum
Loop and OpenAI is sort of a generalized
tool and Latchet they're going to
differentiate on
and we were pulling it up if folks
aren't watching he's pulling up the
mirrorboard
uh to show us where they landed.
Latchet they're going to differentiate
on helps you grow and cooperative. So
when they compare against Etsy, when
they compare against Shopify or setting
up your table at an art fair, they're
going to differentiate on helps you grow
in cooperative and they think none of
the competitors does both of those
things. Well, that is cool. Thank you
for sharing that. And to your point, the
this is where they think it will work.
And then the next step is actually test
this in the market, which is where we go
from here. Uh so let's move on to the
next step and which is the final step of
the foundation sprint.
Yeah. So closing off differentiation is
a short step that uh is just to create
some project principles that will help
you make decisions in line with that
differentiation. And you know you were
just talking about superhuman and
differentiating on speed. And when John
and I worked at Google back in the
2000s, there was this list called 10
things we've found to be true. And one
of the things on that list was fast is
better than slow. And what was
interesting is this is a mantra that you
would actually hear people using in
meetings to help dictate decisions. You
know, well, we're considering this
approach to this view or this approach.
This approach renders, you know, 12
milliseconds faster. That's probably
going to be the one we're going to take.
There's going to be a really compelling
reason for us to not go with just the
one that renders faster or the one that
gets the user to their benefit with one
less click. And this notion that you can
have a a decision-making guide, we think
it we've seen it be so useful for uh for
us in those contexts. We think, hey,
this is an easy moment. You've got your
differentiators kind of loaded up in
your mind. Let's take a second here and
just think what's a principle? How can
we turn that into a principle? So, uh if
we take a look at, uh latchet, you know,
they've got help sellers help each
other. So, if they're trying to make a
decision between two approaches, well,
which one of these helps sellers help
each other? Or do the thing that makes
sellers more money? If we're choosing
between two things, let's do the one
that helps make them more money. And so,
we we then have we've kind of moved on.
We've got a mini manifesto we call it,
which is that differentiation chart and
these principles. And the notion is this
page, the the basics page was just kind
of the core simple stuff you need to
know about this project. The mini
manifesto in one page is your
decision-making guide.
This is so cool. And uh this looks like
it would take a lot of work, but again,
this is just uh a day or two of sitting
around working through this framework.
Yeah, you'll get to this in, you know,
fourish hours with your
Okay. By the end of the first day,
you'll have a mini manifesto that
describes how you win essentially as a
as a company and a startup.
Yeah. Or how you believe it's going to
work. And of course, we're going to test
it.
Yeah. Yeah. Now the next phase of the
foundation sprint is locking in on the
approach we're going to start with. So
we'll continue the story of Latchet here
to it's easier to use an example than to
describe this in the abstract. So coming
into Character Labs, Latchet had sort of
four approaches in mind, but they
weren't sure which one to take. So they
might build an app. That's one approach
they could take. They might build a sort
of a newsletter platform. That's
something obviously they knew how to do.
They might build a Shopify plugin.
That's a simple way to kind of piggyback
on something people are already doing.
They're right, their number one
competitor is Shopify. Or they might
have to build the full stack. And I
think a big question for them was which
of these and how much do we have to
build before there's enough value for
customers that they're actually going to
adopt it and we're actually going to get
some traction and get this thing going.
And it's important to call out here that
all four of these approaches solve the
same problem for the same customer and
they are all likely to differentiate
from the competition in the same ways
based on the unique advantages that the
founders Chris and James bring to this
company. So these are not like wildly
different product ideas or company
ideas. These are just different
approaches. You have the same
destination in mind, but you say, "Hey,
which path could we take?" It's like
pulling up directions on Google Maps.
This one's a little faster, this one
uses less fuel, this one avoids tolls.
Uh, what's the right approach for us to
take?
And I love that the what you the work
you did on that first day eliminates a
lot of ideas you probably had that you
would have probably spent time building
and then realizing, okay, this doesn't
make any sense. It's just like what
everyone else has.
Totally. Totally. Yeah. And we usually
see teams starting projects in one of
two states. And one state is the state
that Latchet finds themselves in where
gosh there's a few different ways we
could do this. How do we decide? We can
discuss and discuss and discuss but you
know that could go on forever. So that's
state one. We we know there are some
options. And state two is we're pretty
locked in on one approach already. We we
think we've got this figured out. In
either of those cases, we think it's
worth taking again like about, you know,
four hoursish to be really careful to
lay out the options. If you think
there's only one option to sort of force
yourself to think, well, what if this
doesn't work? What's another
alternative? Or is there another
alternative that we have previously
considered and dismissed that we should
maybe reconsider just to make sure? And
end with a situation where you've made a
decision clearly about, okay, we've
considered alternatives. this is our
first choice and you've also identified
this is our backup plan so that failure
doesn't seem quite so scary when we
start to run experiments and we're
really able to to pivot fast if should
that happen.
So what we're going to do on the second
day of the foundation sprint or this
sort of third phase which is the
approach is to identify those different
paths. So for latchet here they've got A
C and D options. We're going to color
code those and then we're going to plot
them on these charts. So, we've got
these different lenses. We call this
activity magic lenses. And the notion is
if we had a discussion about it and we
could as investors if we could imagine
like waving a magic wand and putting the
perfect team of adviserss in place to
counsel the founders on this decision.
We would love for them to have a
customer expert, somebody who's just,
you know, brilliant vision for the
product and the customer experience. And
they're, you know, hammering their fist
on the table saying the customer, the
customer, the customer, make the
decision that's best for the customer.
And so we'll plot those options on these
axes of easy to use versus hard to use
and perfect solution to the customer
problem versus, you know, this is just
an okay solution to the customer
problem. And then similarly, we want
some an adviser who's going to pound
their fist on the table for building
something cheap and fast, getting it out
into the market, being pragmatic, get it
out there as fast as possible. That's
the pragmatic lens. We want somebody
who's going to advocate for growth.
What's the way to reach the most
customers, get it in people's hands as
fast as possible, easy to adopt. We want
somebody who's going to advocate for for
money, for the financial health of the
business. So, what's going to create
long-term value for the customers?
where's where's there the biggest
audience of these folks? We want to look
at differentiation which we spent you
know the first half of the foundation
sprint establishing. Well, we want to
consider these approaches through that
lens as well. And so what the teams will
do is to plot these options on these
lenses. They'll almost always create
some lenses of their own, some custom
lenses that matter to them. You know,
they might have one about their
conviction. Um I think there's a there's
sort of a humorous one for mellow where
it's like which you know founder is like
f yeah it's exactly what I want to what
I want to build and on the other end of
the spectrum it's like you know nah just
kind of the the sort of heat of
excitement that you feel that might be a
really important decision
that feels really important like that
feels like that should be one of your
you call these the magic lenses.
Yeah it probably should be it probably
should be
like how excited are you to build this
feels like a really important piece.
Yeah, we saw that one in this is the our
cohort of labs that's going on right
now. And I'll bring that one that one up
for um for context.
If we add it, we can call it the Lenny
Lens.
The Lenny Lens. Yeah. Oh, that's a good
idea.
So, yeah. So, here it is.
And um you can see that Marie is more
likely to swear than than Ben
apparently. But the that it's it's
crucial, right? And many founders,
they'll have different one of the
challenges is that for each founder, I
think each set of founders, there's
maybe a different way that they phrase
what that means, what conviction means
to them. And sometimes, and maybe it's
as simple as this. It's just I just feel
it. I just know. And sometimes it's a
little bit more like, well, I, you know,
it's it's a it's conviction, but it's
also what's the data that we have behind
it? And and that's what forms my my
intuition about it.
Awesome. I I I love that lens. I love
that you're asterric out so it's not a
little bit little just slightly
concealed
slightly
that's the part yeah if you zoom in it's
it's actually uh not censored so the
cool thing about this lens's thing is at
the end you've done all that you've
plotted it all out and if you're having
a conversation like that you just have
to sort of maintain in memory what did
that person say what did that other
person say what's that conversation I
had you know a week ago whatever here
it's all laid out And sometimes you zoom
out and it's honestly as simple as like,
oh, hey, look, you know, the the blue
one is in the top right quadrant of
almost every single lens. Like what what
is that one? What's going on? That might
just be an easy decision. Sometimes you
zoom out and you say, "Oh, clearly like
nothing wins in every lens." And that's
actually really reassuring because then
you know there is no perfect decision.
There's nothing that checks all the
boxes. And that's going to help us
decide because now we decide which is
the most important lens, which is the
most important viewpoint to take. And
you can you can actually move forward in
either either way, either situation you
get in where there's sort of consistency
across all the lenses or there's not.
You either pick a lens or you just pick
the the consensus winner.
I love that this step answers a question
that's been in the back of my mind that
I think a lot of people wonder as
they're hearing this is just why don't I
just build something and launch it and
learn and like what am I spending all
this time sitting in a room and this is
and this to me is a big part of the
answer is just like spending an hour or
two thinking through here's the ideas we
have how do they compare on the how do
they look on these magical lenses which
makes so much sense like how do they
just filter on what customers will love
most will help us grow the fastest, will
drive the most money, things like that.
Like, it's such a simple, quick exercise
that will save you so much time building
and launching and having to spend time
learning. Like, that is weeks, days,
months of work versus a couple hours
could save you so much of that time.
And it's also the case that you start
building something, it's exciting, you
can move fast, it's easy to easier and
easier to see progress now with AI
tools. And that act of building and
starting to create something has a
momentum of its own that can be hard to
stop. And if you're headed in the wrong
direction, you can spend a lot of time
building and making progress, but it's
just if it's not progress in the right
direction, it's it's actually hurting
you. And that's why we we want people to
pause and and take this. It's really the
as you said earlier the ROI is high but
it feels very unnatural to pause when
you're so excited at the beginning and
ready to go to pause and say okay let's
make sure we're taking the right path
but you know you just imagine you're you
know you're Gandalf you're Frodo you're
starting off you're trying to get to
Mordor it's a long trip you don't want
to take the wrong path you want to take
the you know think before you start
marching through you know the the swamps
or whatever
one phenomenon we've seen when teams are
building things really quickly with AI
is that the more AI generated or
assisted they are the more generic they
tend to turn out which makes sense if
you think about how LLMs were developed
you know they're all basically
pre-trained on the same data and so in
this excitement and this rush to say wow
look at how fast we can build it you
actually end up with something that is
less differentiated than what already
exists in the world and then you know
let's say you launch it and that you
know takes longer than building sort a
clickable prototype, but you launch it
because you're moving so fast. And then
you get data from the people who managed
to find that thing about what they did
with it, but you don't get any data
about what they didn't do with it. And
you certainly don't get any data about
the people who never found it, who
never, you know, tried it. Maybe they
landed on your website and they're like,
blah, another like another generic AI
generated thing. Like it's that's not
worth my time. And so, uh, we think it's
really helpful to basically put yourself
in a situation where you can slow down a
little bit and do some like some some
hard thinking, some deep thinking about
what's actually going to make your
product unique and then you can switch
into this mode of like, okay, great.
Now, let's go as fast as possible and
get that out into customers hands. But,
um, if you don't take this step first,
it's actually kind of counterintuitive
that going fast can actually slow you
down in the long run. Yeah. To build on
that, I had this guest recently, Bob
Baxley.
Yeah.
Bob.
Okay. So, he has this really interesting
insight. He calls uh he calls it I think
he calls it the primal mark.
Essentially, his feedback is wait as
long as possible to start any sort of
sketch or prototype because as soon as
you start drawing what you're building
it now everything you do will be a
response to that.
And so the more time you can spend
before starting to concept out the
solution, the more likely are to land on
something that works.
Yeah, that is super interesting. And uh
you know it's
counterintuitive.
Yeah. And I find myself challenged to
think about it in the context of the
sprints that we run with founders. But I
think one way to interpret that in in
the work that we do is that we used to
just run design sprints with with every
team. like that was our hammer and and
you know everything looked like a nail.
And part of what we found so valuable
about doing the foundation sprint is
that it it keeps you away from ideiation
for just a little bit longer and it it
forces you to think about, you know, why
you're unique and and the market that
you're going into before you get to that
moment of creating something that looks
realistic and then maybe being a little
bit locked into to that approach. That's
such a like I love that that this
emerged out of that like you guys are
were so design sprint oriented and it's
just like cool let's just make prototype
let's design let's make it real let's
show people and that's like I think
where a lot of people's minds are at
more and more or and maybe as a result
and then this is almost like a okay
maybe that wasn't the right approach to
start maybe it's actually better to
think a little bit of what we want to
design and build before and so just the
fact that you guys spent so much your
life and time on that and then realize
this is actually potentially even more
important to do. Uh is it says a lot.
Well, and I ideas always get distilled
down to like one thing that people grab
on to and they they focus on. And I
think with the design sprint, it got
distilled down to just build a prototype
like just just quit messing around and
build something. But you know, the
reality is when you run a design sprint,
it's five days and you don't build the
prototype until the fourth day, right?
So you do you do a bunch of work to
figure out um you know what is uh how
does our customer learn about this
thing? um you know what are the
different ideas that we're bringing to
what our solution could look like which
of those are the most likely to work and
only then at the end of the week are you
building a prototype but I do think that
as the that method has become really
widely known uh people just think about
the you know let's build something and
then once you multiply that times the
the power of AI it definitely creates
this narrative that the the only way to
build something new is to just create
the product as quickly as possible
and that that doesn't really match our
experience, you know, that doesn't
really kind of fit the pattern of what
we've seen working best across the few
hundred companies that we've worked
with. I think this validates in some
ways the uh role of a product manager
where the PM's job is to help the team
figure out what should we be building
and are we all aligned on what we're
building before we start designing and
building. And uh so this is almost like
like this process is almost like the
product requirements document of a of a
company uh which I think a lot of
product people listening to this will
feel really good about. Yeah, we see
this as a great tool for product people.
It's a way to
give you a structure for leading your
team through those decisions and a way
to give the all the folks on the team
including the the person who's the the
product leader but the person who's the
engineering leader, the person who's the
marketing leader, the sales leader, the
design leaders. The exact right
opportunity to contribute and
participate in forming the strategy. the
exact right opportunity as we get into
design sprints following the foundation
sprints to then make it real and you
know turn that that idea that hypothesis
about what might work into hopefully
evidence that it does work. I feel like
it's actually more helpful than to
engineers like non-product people
because I think a PM brain would be like
I want to do this uh intuitively whether
they do it right or not. I think it's
other functions almost that are like no
just jump jump straight to design
straight to prototyping. Let me ask you
uh like while we're on this tangent
we're on this wild tangent out of this
process but I want to uh this question
has been in my mind
because I recently had a founder on the
podcast uh uh Mayor who built this
company called base 44. He built it. It
sold in six months for $80 million two
weeks.
And this journey of that is he just had
a problem he wanted to solve for himself
for his girlfriend for a scouts program.
He built it, people started using it and
he kind of evolved it from there. And
obviously he didn't go through a process
like this. Thoughts on just like is it
okay to just do that? When should
someone think about okay, I should
actually set aside time to do a
foundation sprint versus like I'm just
motivated to solve a problem for my
friends. I'm just going to build it,
evolve it, iterate with them, and kind
of go from there.
One of the observations from our
hundreds of experiences
working alongside founders in the early
days of their projects and watching them
make decisions and watching them try
things and succeed or fail is that there
are so many founders who are incredibly
bright, incredibly capable. They have
great insights about the market, about
an opportunity, and yet their startup
does not work out. And we there's a a
problem with selection bias that we, you
know, we we hear from the folks who they
were brilliant. They were, you know,
they checked all those boxes I just
described. They saw a great opportunity.
They they were smart. They they executed
well, they had courage and conviction,
and they did it. And it worked out. And
it was a tremendous success. And I I
think that the danger in thinking like
well they didn't follow a process so I
don't need to and you know that may be
true and you know that's that maybe
maybe you don't need it but what we
believe is you have a better this just
increases your odds this is a chance to
to get more clear on is this a good
opportunity to get more clear on will
the thing I build click with customers
and you know if you've already figured
out that no this things my my product
has taken off my product is working.
We've actually had founders in labs who
while they started off Character Labs
and they said, you know, I started
selling this thing and it's already
taking off. I want to stop running
experiments. And we're like, yeah, stop
running experiments. You don't need to
do this. If you've got product market
fit, if you've got evidence that this
thing is clicking and you're you have
conviction, run with it. But if you're
not there, this is a great path to get
you going. And if you're not sure if the
thing you're going to build is going to
turn into that, you know, $80 million
exit in, you know, in 6 months, we
believe this is a good chance to improve
your odds. People hearing this might be
feel like I haven't heard of any company
doing this that has become a trillion
dollar IPO success. Uh what what would
make me believe that this is a the
process I should follow versus just I'm
just going to do what I hear on YC, just
build it, launch it, iterate, that kind
of thing. What can you share to get
people confidence this is the approach
to take?
Well, the first thing I'd say is give us
some time. We're we're pretty new to
this. We started Character Labs about
three years ago. We created the
foundation sprint about three years ago.
But more seriously, when we were
creating this method, one of the things
that we did was look back across all the
projects we've been involved in and the
ones that were really successful and we
looked for patterns. And while those
teams didn't have the foundation sprint,
they ended up having really clear
differentiation and a really clear view
of what made them unique that they were
able to build on. And as we ran design
sprints with them, we were able to sort
of uh test and validate against that
differentiation. Um, so we believe that
this is sort of a key to success even if
those teams didn't have access to this
exact same methodology. So what I'm
hearing is this is essentially like
alpha in uh starting a company. This is
a new process that companies are just
starting to use. You guys are working
closely with founders and it's rooted in
the success of many many many companies
that you guys were involved in early on
and continue to be involved in. Yeah.
It's based off of this thing we've seen
again and again in the most successful
projects when we're inside the room in
the early days and we're seeing people
make decisions. this is what drives
those decisions. It's differentiation.
And so if we look back across, you know,
all of the sprints that we've been a
part of over the the years and John and
I have been inside lots of these rooms,
lots of these conversations.
And if you're not watching on YouTube,
by the way, there's a cool visual that
uh that Jake is showing. Yeah, it spans
across Google, Google Ventures,
Character Capital, and if you're
watching on YouTube, you'll see all
these little white circles, and each one
sort of represents, you know, a company
that we've seen inside of during these
design sprints. And there are a lot of
really great success stories in there.
You know, we've had the chance to I
mentioned the story of Google Meet and
being there and figuring out what is it
that's going to make those things stand
out. That was what made the project
finally start to take off and to this
day is still sort of what animates it
being inside of, you know, the early
days of what became Google Photos or
Google Trips and and some of the early
design sprints and there's there are a
lot of others on here. But honestly, of
course, we've also seen inside a lot
that that didn't work out. If we looked
inside the greatest hits though, the
real smash successes, we looked inside
all of those, we realized there is a
common element and that common element
in all of them is differentiation. That
there was clarity around this is what
we're trying to prove to customers. This
is the promise we're making. And so we
we've been on those teams or we've
worked alongside those founders who have
this clear idea of differentiation and
sometimes they're not right. They run
the experiments and they change it. But
the thing is they're keyed into
differentiation as being crucial.
They're not just thinking about the
product and trying to get the right
shape of the product or trying to make
it, you know, usable or whatever.
They're really keyed in on
differentiation and how do we find the
right promise and deliver on that
promise and express that promise to
customers. So to explain a little bit
quickly of what I mean by
differentiation and how this has
manifested in products we've seen. If
you go back to the early days of Gmail
in the 2000s, you know, if you had
email, you were probably using Hotmail
or Yahoo and it worked fine and you
didn't have to think about it and this
new product comes along and you're like,
"God, I'm not going to want to switch my
email address. What a hassle. Who wants
to do that?" You no one. Gmail's promise
was, "Hey, massive storage, great
search." And as we were building the
product out and you know marketing and
explaining it to people and making
decisions inside the project, we had to
continue to deliver on great search.
Great search. Great search. That was
that was key to standing out. You fast
forward to 2014 and we're working with
this tiny company who's now competing
with Gmail, who's now like sort of the
market leader people are used to using
in, you know, in their teams. And here's
this new messaging software called
Slack. and they're, you know, trying to
reach new customers and gosh, switching
to Slack is an even bigger hassle than
switching to your email address because
everybody on the team has to switch.
Well, Slack says, hey, if you believe
that having fun and boosting teamwork is
important, it's going to be clear to
you. This is a new way of looking at the
world. And when they were making their
decisions in their first big ad
campaign, their first big marketing
campaign, this was what they were trying
to convey to customers. So, we kind of
kind of see that from the inside.
Another one, we didn't see this one from
the inside, but in one that we're all
sort of familiar with is what happened
with with Chad GPT. You know, it goes
from this trusted, I don't have to think
about it. I'm going to run a Google
search to, oh wow, it's a new way of
looking at the world. There's zero
clicks, just tells you the answer. This
thing's great.
This is also something that we've seen
in some of the early success stories
from our own portfolio. So 2019, this
company called Reclaim going after
calendar management. And you know, most
of us manage our own calendars. Most of
us don't have administrators helping us
out with that and you know it's free.
We're in control. Reclaim's argument was
hey we can automatically we can use AI
to help you focus and to automatically
prioritize your calendar. And that
animated enough people to take the
plunge and switch and try it out that
they were able to build up an audience
of, you know, tens of thousands of users
and uh Dropbox acquired them last year.
A great answer to my question. You guys
well prepared for for those skeptics. Uh
part of our motivation our our selfish
mo motivation with this foundation
sprint is that you know now that we are
investing our own money into companies
and we're working with all these
founders we want them to have that same
clarity on differentiation you know we
saw how important that was to Gmail and
to Slack and to all these other
companies and we want to bring that we
want to sort of give them that same
advantage and help them avoid the you
know the pitfalls that all the other
unsuccessful teams and companies that
we've seen have fallen into. So that's
that's kind of what we're trying to do
here is bring the the lessons from these
really successful teams into, you know,
any team that reads the book and runs
this process.
And the special sauce that John and I
bring is that we're obsessed with the
the sequence of decisions that you make
and how you work together with your team
to make good decisions quickly. And that
specificity about the the method is
something that we we do have a lot of
evidence behind it working well because
of what's happened with the design
sprint and with how many successful
teams have have run that at those
companies who are you know trillion
dollar or whatever kind of giant exit
team all all kinds of teams run design
sprints. This is that same methodology
around how we work together at high
velocity and high quality and it's just
brought to a different part of the
process. Excellent answer. Uh, speaking
of the method, we went on the world's
most epic tangent. I want to bring us
back. We haven't finished actually going
through the process. I think we're
towards the tail end of it. So, let's
just finish that. What else do you do?
So, you have this this uh Yeah, I guess.
Yeah, let's catch us up. Let's catch up
with Latchet. So, as a refresher for you
who forgot, Latchet are building this
tool for artisans. They want to help
them sell with the community networking
features like you might find on Substack
and they've identified their
differentiation. They've identified
their approach now using magic lenses
and all of this is going to come
together to create a founding
hypothesis. So if we help artisans solve
online sales growth with a social sales
app and then they've also got their
backup plan or we could build the full
stack solution. If that doesn't work, we
believe they're going to choose it over
Shopify and Etsy because our solution is
cooperative and easy to use. And in this
single sentence, we've laid bare their
strategy. And now they're going to try
to find out was that work.
So
that is so cool. So the output of the
sprint is the founding hypothesis. And I
love that the term hypothesis is a part
of this because it's not telling you
this will work. It's this is the thing
you will now test. Absolutely. And every
project has at its core, every new
product has at its core a hypothesis.
They h there is a founding hypothesis.
It's just usually not explicit. It's
usually hidden. And different people on
the team may have different ideas about
what it is. And because it's not
explicit, it's very hard to interrogate
it and test it and find out if the the
different variables in it are the right
variables.
I'm curious what's in that photo to the
right as you're showing the YouTube. Oh
yeah, if uh if you're on YouTube, so
that this is just we did this sprint
together in person and so on latchet's
board you're and you're going to see
that like here's where they wrote it out
and took a photo of it and dropped it in
and then later filled it out on the
mural board.
Beautiful. And I it has their old name
there.
That's right. Yeah. Yeah.
Rebrand that
lyric, which it turns out is not the
easiest for SEO. There's a lot of lyrics
out there.
There is a lot of lyrics. I know some
lyrics. Uh and just to understand is the
next step the design sprint and that's
where you actually start testing.
Exactly. So if we zoom out now we see
now they're going to head into a
sequence of design sprints running one
after another. Each of those design
sprints starts with the founding
hypothesis. Then the team is going to
say okay what are the biggest risks that
you know that hypothesis not being true?
What do we need to assess right now?
gonna make a map of how customers
discover the product, what that core
experience looks like, and then figure
out using that map where's the where's
the key moment for assessing that risk.
So for them, the biggest risk is do
people even will these artisans even
want this thing? Are they actually going
to want to have a community sharing sort
of sales platform and they decide the
key moment for us to test that it's
actually on the landing page. They
figure we can prototype landing pages
that describe the product and learn a
lot for our first experiment just just
with landing pages. They're going to
sketch solutions. This will be familiar
to anyone who's, you know, heard about
design sprints. You're going to each
person sketching their own proposal for
how that key moment should work. Choose
the strongest of those. In this case,
they choose they're going to actually
prototype three things. So, they test
three things head-to-head against each
other. Fake brands for each one. So they
look like three different products. And
then this is a really key part. At the
end of the design sprint, we've got a
scorecard. And this is actually a new
innovation. This is not in the sprint.
Oh [__] here we go. New hot off the
presses design sprint uh improvement.
So this scorecard is going to break down
the founding hypothesis. Hey, as we talk
to each customer, was this the right
person? Is this the right kind of
customer for us? Do they have the
problem that we think they have? Was
this the right approach for them? Did
they choose it over the competition?
They're going to test these prototypes
headto-head and also show people like,
okay, here's Etsy, here's Shopify. Now,
out of all these five options, think
about out loud about, you know, what do
you what how do you compare these? So,
do do we believe they they'd actually
choose it? Did the differentiation
actually work for those differentiators
valuable and and motivating to them?
Does it click? So, our new book is
called Click. And you know the the idea
there is you can see when a product
clicks with one person and that's a
that's a helpful signal. Now granted
these interviews are kind of a
simulation. It's not like the real world
but they're a helpful signal that we're
on track for product market fit. If we
see gosh this product just seems to be
clicking with customer after customer.
That's a really strong signal and that's
when people start to get the confidence
that it's time to build. That's a really
good term by the way. I that's such a
good way to describe what it feels like.
Does it just click with them?
Just kind of clicks. Yeah. And if you
look across Latchett's first scorecard,
there's a ton of red. It's it's a lot of
things that didn't work.
The the conclusion at the end in this
last column, there's a conclusion. Hey,
we interviewed this case. They
interviewed four customers.
Well, it looks like this is the right
customer. It looks like they have this
problem, but everything else kind of
didn't work about the hypothesis.
Approach wasn't working. Differentiation
wasn't working.
There's some many hypotheses kind of
about the prototype itself. Just lots of
red on here. So, they sprint again. And
and just zooming out for a second, this
is a team who just started working on
this new company. And you know,
sometimes it can feel slow. We talked
about it feeling slow to go through all
these steps, but they're only a week in
and they've already built three
prototypes and they've tested those
three prototypes with four real
customers. and they have this
superdetailed scorecard of here's what's
working, here's not what's not working.
That's after a week. So, it's
interesting how what can feel slow in
the hour to hour actually can really
speed you up in the the weeks and months
uh time scale.
That was such good context because I was
feeling that. And to your point, most
founders do not do this much testing,
iterating, learning in the first few
weeks of their startup. They might spend
a few weeks just talking to customers
without showing a prototype and then
they might spend a few months building
an MVP and then they might if you know
maybe they're going to spend some more
time talking to customers while showing
them the MVP maybe they'll do manual
onboarding something like that but yeah
that plays out over months and it fits
with what founders tell us you know it's
of course it's a subjective measure but
founders who go through this process
with us they say that they're able to
accelerate three to four months of work
into the three or four weeks of
backto-back sprint that we're doing
together in Character Labs.
Excellent context. Thanks for throwing
that in there.
And these conversations with customers
are so much more fruitful and pointed
when you've got the context of I know
exactly what my hypothesis is and you
have prototypes to show them. We have a
founder in our group of startups in
Character Labs at the moment. I'm
thinking of Maruthie John who's uh comes
from doing sales at Rippling and we had
been talking to tons of customers while
starting off the his company and he said
you know had 50 conversations over the
past month but I learned so much more
from even the first conversation when I
had a hypothesis and I had a prototype
or a couple prototypes to show them it's
like night and day. That is a great
example. This this all makes sense as
you guys describe it like you're you're
actually testing something very concrete
that your entire team is aligned behind
and actual prototypes and you've thought
about different directions. So it's
you're testing something very specific
versus just generally testing at your
general concept. As we go into the
second design sprint for uh Latchet,
they're making some edits to their
founding hypothesis. Now they're, you
know, revising a few things, making new
sketches, new proposals for what this
solution might look like. They've
learned a lot in that first sprint, a
new prototype, uh, that got a prototype
that has more detail now. So, they are
engineers. They're starting to actually
write some code and and put some more
detail behind the product. It's more
robust. And again, they're trying to fix
that positioning. Here's their
scorecard. And if you're watching on
YouTube, you'll be able to see it. But
again, there's a lot of red here. At
first blush, this the scorecard is is
bleeding, but there are some promising
signs. There's like maybe a few little
sun breaks. There's some spots where
some of the red has started to flip to
yellow. And so, if we look at the
conclusion on the far right, they're
starting to believe their
differentiation is dialed in and they're
starting to believe that this could be
the right approach. They may be able to
get people to choose it to the
competition even though they haven't
done it yet. So, those are starting to
become yellow lights on the scorecard.
And now they'll take what they've
learned and now we're into the third
consecutive week of design sprints.
Again, they're going to sort of review
that founding hypothesis. They're going
to sketch. They're recruiting a new
slate of customers as they do each week.
A new prototype. Again,
more code in the prototype. It's it's
becoming more and more robust, more
realistic as they're also adjusting the
the marketing and the positioning at the
same time. So, all of these things kind
of go in concert. The product itself and
the marketing are are sort of one as
they're as they're moving along. And
this is an extreme example.
What?
Everything is green.
Everything's green. If you can't see,
every single one is green.
Oh my god.
And this is this is extreme, but it is a
pattern that we've seen
again and again. This is a real example.
Wow. How do I invest? get us in this
round. This is great.
Yeah, this is pretty great.
This is great.
So, um, so we see this again and again
and I, you know, I can share a couple
of, uh, other boards of ones that are in
progress. We're also constantly
adjusting the templates so you can get
to see a little bit more how the how
people will edit their their founding
hypothesis from sprint to sprint. So,
you know, Melo, who we were talking
about, here's their first prototype and,
you know, here's their first scorecard.
Lots of lots of yellow for them. Maybe
they're a little bit more likely to use
yellow than red. And then here's the
edits to their founding hypothesis after
the first sprint. You know, so you can
kind of see in red they're changing
slightly changing the definition of
their target customer from the first
week. Slightly changing the the problem
that they're solving, slightly changing
the approach, slightly changing the
competition. They've dialed in. They've
gotten more crisp on who are we up
against. They've gotten a little bit
more crisp. just a tiny tweak on what
how do we explain this to people to get
them excited about it? What's the
differentiation? They sprint again, they
prototype again, and if we just jump
down just looking at hypotheses, they
learn a bunch and now there's another
slight tweak to that founding
hypothesis. And so week after week,
you're learning, but you're also really
able to able to track exactly what is it
that we learned and how does that affect
our our strategy. Okay, guys, this was
incredible. I think we've we've covered
the entire process. I love that you also
covered the design sprint pieces which
uh which isn't part of this book but is
such a core if you clearly these things
are very uh connected and meant to work
together. So you go from here's the
thing we should be building to how to
actually test it. Let me ask you before
we wrap up is there anything else that
you think is really important for people
to know before they start trying this
process at home and is there anything
you can point them to to actually try
this at home? One thing we didn't talk
about we go we used an example of a
company who's not building an AI first
product. Latchet's building a you know
this thisworked community
uh sales platform for for artisans. It
would probably be interesting to look at
how people use this when they are
building a very technical product when
they're vibe coding prototypes. That's a
question we're getting all the time.
What's the influence on this of the
speed with which you can build
something?
That's an awesome idea. Let's definitely
do that.
Yeah. Okay. So let's jump in here and
take a look at a company again in our
current group of labs teams. Axion
Orbital it's called and the founder Denj
is actually running this whole process
solo which is pretty cool too. He's a
he's a remarkable guy and we have a
couple of solo founders right now and uh
who are you know able to generate you
can see just to give like a sneak peek
he's generating when we talk about
customers all these sticky notes himself
and making the decisions himself about
which is the right one. But to ground us
in this story, his founding hypothesis
is he wants to help geospatial devs
solve these sort of complex workflows
with a browser-based noode development
environment. So we'll um we'll take a
look just really quickly at what his
prototypes look like. And in the first
week, I can show you this prototype
right here. And it's a marketing page.
And on this marketing page, there's a
link to a uh to a video. So, if I click
find out more, I'm going to see this
video. And this video is going to kind
of hear Den and Jay talking over it. And
it's going to kind of walk through a
screen share of a very rudimentary
version of what this product might look
like. Now, if you're watching on YouTube
and you see this prototype, you might
think, "Boy, that marketing page and the
demo itself, pretty bare bones, not the
most polished looking. This is uh this
doesn't look super compelling." So, he
was focusing in that first sprint on the
messaging, you know, on finding those
those people who actually have that
role, testing it with them, and he
learned a lot. So, if we, you know, sort
of go back to his his scorecard, we'll
see, okay, that was, you know, that was
a pretty good one. actually a lot of
green on his first scorecard, but he
also felt like what he tested was was
pretty incomplete. Now, one thing that's
cool here, we saw the big leap with
Latchet from one week to another in
terms of like their learnings and the
scorecards. One of the things that's
interesting here is to go from Vinn and
Jay's first prototype here to his second
prototype and it's obvious he's been
able to just build a ton in uh in the
next week and he's using, you know, AI
based tools. He's doing a lot of work.
He's also just a terrific engineer. But
here we've got like a much more real
looking marketing page, very detailed.
And an important thing that he's done
here with this is he's built out a lot
and created a video of something so that
the product while not fully functional,
you can see exactly how it works. So if
we sort of play this video, he's created
this demonstration of what it looks like
when you type in a query into the engine
and exactly the kinds of results you
get. And by doing a combination of vibe
coding, real coding, all of which is
based off of, you know, pencil sketches,
we can go back and see the sketches he's
doing on paper to define this is what I
think needs to be in there to make this
compelling to deliver on my
differentiation. And then he's using a a
product video so that the entire thing
doesn't have to work fully free form.
That's what it can look like when a team
is building something that's that's you
know more AI ccentric when it's a more
sophisticated tool when people are going
to be curious about the sort of the ins
and outs of it. So along those lines,
where do you find people are leveraging
AI most in helping them through these
sprints through either the foundation
sprint or the design sprint? Is it
mostly just by coding prototypes?
That's definitely the first and biggest
use of AI in sprint so far is is in, you
know, making prototypes that look more
realistic faster. And you know, it's
kind of like uh you know, having an
entire prototyping team on standby,
right? so that you don't have to just
make it yourself and sort of piece
things together, but you can have, you
know, a ton of people ready to jump in,
make something look really realistic.
But it's also really critical. We found
that while you're outsourcing that
prototyping work, you don't outsource
the thinking like you don't kind of skip
over the the part where you think about,
well, what is the actual copy on the
website? How do I actually describe what
the product is, how it's differentiated?
Um, and so it's it's one of the reasons
why doing the foundation sprint first
and then doing a design sprint can
really help you and and you know because
it it allows you to spend time working
on that harder part of what it means to
design and and build a product. And then
once you have a clear view of that then
you can use AI tools to go really fast.
And you know, in this example that Jake
is showing of Axian orbital, people get
really clever about which parts of this
need to be real, which parts of this can
be vibe coded, which parts of this can
just be a static Figma mockup. Um, and
it's all about kind of creating a
simulation, uh, something that looks
realistic that you can put in front of
real customers to help you answer the
the key questions. That's a really good
point that you're making. And again,
it's just a reminder, you will move
faster if you slow down a little bit at
the beginning that because prototyping
is so easy now and just things that
look, it's so easy to make something
that looks really nice and kind of doing
what you want. But spending a little
time making sure you understand what
you're testing and what you want uh is
becomes more important.
We had a couple of teams in this current
group of character labs where they
jumped to vibe coding prototypes like
right away, like at the very beginning.
And you know when you when you generate
something using an using an LLM using an
AI tool like it looks pretty real like
it looks you know it looks believable
and so I think there's a temptation to
say like okay like this is this is good
to go like it it looks close enough that
I'm just going to you know show that to
customers and then what they found was
like actually the you know it was so it
was super generic like it didn't really
describe what the product was. didn't
really describe how it was different
because you know it was it was generated
by a model that uh is trained on you
know sort of existing products and so in
that second sprint that was when they
really took a step back and said okay
let's think through this and then shift
into prototyping mode so it's definitely
helping people speed up but we also
think there's an important lesson here
that while you're outsourcing prototype
prototyping don't outsource the thinking
as well
I see you pulling something up Jake that
might be
imagine you want to show?
Yeah, I think it's kind of interesting
to see the sketches that went into
Denjay's prototype, the Axian orbital
prototype that we just looked at,
because they they are super detailed.
And this is doing this level of thought
where you're you're pausing, you're
being really intentional about what does
the customer need to know, what needs to
happen for them to find a solution to
their problem on, you know, in within
the product.
That's a way of doing your prompt
engineering. If you end up vibe coding
this prototype, but you start off with a
very clear plan about this is what the
thing needs to look at look like rather
than going immediately into a
conversational mode where you're sort of
co-designing with the LLM and going back
and forth via chat conversation. This is
much likelier to yield an opinionated
product that makes sense, that's very
clearly defined around the the problem
that you're trying to solve, the tasks
that need to happen to solve that
problem, and the right messaging, the
right wording that's really crisply
aligned with what you know about your
customers, what you know about what they
care about. That's such a good point.
Again, just the concept of the primal
mark is ringing in my head as you talk
about this. Just as soon as you make
that prototype, everything from that
point is a response to that first idea
versus have I actually thought through
what this should be. Guys, we did it.
This is uh incredible. I think this is
going to help a lot of people think
through and actually save a lot of time.
Um is there anything else that you want
to share, leave listeners with? Maybe a
last nugget or something you want to I
don't know, just double down on to leave
folks with before we wrap up. Well, one
quick thing is that we've we've shared a
lot of examples in this uh in this
conversation and we actually have a
template, a Miro template that folks can
use if they want to run their own
foundation sprint. It's the template
that we use, you know, when we're
working with founders, taking them
through these sprints. We we do our work
in Miro. Even if we're in person with
them, we're usually working in Mirro or
maybe working on paper and then
capturing it in Muro because it's it's
just such a great canvas to work on. Um,
and and we'll make that template
available so anybody who's who's
listening or watching can can grab that
and and use it to run their own
foundation sprint.
That's amazing. You answered the
question I asked that I forgot to come
back to. Uh, can we give people a URL?
We'll put it in the show notes, but
should they is it at your Yeah, I guess
where can folks find it?
You should find it at character.vc and
you can uh go there and we'll have we'll
have a page for you to
Amazing. So easy.
Uh, that is awesome. So, that's so
awesome that you guys are doing that.
Obviously, you could also read the book
and that goes through a lot of this
process, but I think the template is
just like a plug-and-play. Let's just do
this at home. Obviously, if they want to
go deeper, they can work with you guys
to have you. It's such a win. They take
money. You give them money and you help
them figure out what the heck to build.
What a deal. And that's also
character.bc. They want to explore that.
Y
amazing. Okay. Uh, is there anything
else, Jake, that you wanted to share
before we close up?
No, just, you know, if if you made it
this far, uh hopefully your your mind
and heart is is open to this idea, but
we know it's a lot to ask to clear the
calendar and follow these these steps.
But if John and I weren't so convinced
that beginnings are essential to getting
your best efforts in the hands of people
and to achieving the the things you want
for your customers,
we wouldn't be doing this. We wouldn't
be going to all the trouble. There are
simpler things we can we can be going
after. Um the the kind of cool thing
we've found about working in this way
though we've we've focused a lot on
finding product market fit and building
your business, getting started, getting
momentum, getting alignment, all these
things that tactically are important
that business-wise are important. But
another part of it that's a nice side
benefit that actually maybe is the most
important thing of all is how close it
brings you to your customers, to the
people who you're building for because
you're interacting with them. You're
focusing on them as you plan and you're
interacting with them on a weekly basis
when you work in this way and how close
it brings teammates together in a very
authentic way. We're working together on
the most important things and we don't
have to navigate the usual social
dynamics of conversations where one
person has an idea and they're pitching
it. We don't have to navigate the
constant context switches of the
calendar that dominates our days. We're
just working on the most important thing
and the structure takes care of a lot of
the the difficulty of the
the process of what we should do. And we
just find people come out of it with
renewed motivation, renewed energy, and
renewed enthusiasm around the fact that
they get to work on what actually
matters to them.
Yeah. And it just feels like really fun.
Just this part of the process is so fun.
And then not having to decide how to
approach it. Having someone just give
you here's a framework to follow.
It's like a yoga class, right? It's like
I don't know how to do yoga, but explain
to me step by step.
Yoga for startups. That'll be the title
for this episode.
Guys, this was awesome. Uh, I'm gonna
skip the lightning round just because
we've gone long. And I guess just where
can folks find you online and how can
listeners be useful to you?
You can find me on LinkedIn. John, I
think find you on LinkedIn, too.
Yeah.
And we'd love for people to apply to
Character Labs or if you know a founder,
apply to Character Labs. Get in touch
with us. Character.vc.
There we go. All right, guys. Thank you
so much for being here and for sharing.
Yeah. Thanks, Lenny.
Thanks, Lenny.
Bye, everyone.
Thank you so much for listening. If you
found this valuable, you can subscribe
to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify,
or your favorite podcast app. Also,
please consider giving us a rating or
leaving a review as that really helps
other listeners find the podcast. You
can find all past episodes or learn more
about the show at lennispodcast.com.
See you in the next episode.